22 years, do you recall much statistical
similarity between those who were admitted with
high scores, well, with their admission
criterion and status, and their performance at
A&M?
I think we'd have to go into the measurement and
research services to figure out. I do think I
recall that those who were admitted with the best
academic and test scores probably came out better
as far as the grade point average is concerned.
Many of them who were admitted with not as strong an
academic record probably had to work harder at it
and probably graduated. We still, we hear the
tale, though, that
as far as successful graduates, oftentimes those
who graduated with the highest grade point
average, they go more into research and writings
and things like this, where those with a somewhat
lesser, although not necessarily the bottom, but
they perform more of the managerial functions and
more of the day-to-day operations and most many of
the ones are very successful financially have
been those who have learned to work hard while they
were going to school I think all right let's make
believe now that we have hired you as a consultant
to Texas A&M to advise them about admissions
process and criterion based on your experience
what would you advise them what process would you
advise and what factors would you advise them to
consider
well i would have to assume first if you're going to
do something like this that you've probably got a
limited number of freshmen that you would want to
enroll and of course what you want to do is get those
who you think would be the most successful or most
likely to complete the curriculum in probably
prescribed, quote, four-year time?
I think you've got to have some basic things which
you want to look at. I think that the academic
performance of the student is certainly probably
the best criteria that you'd want to, that we have.
In addition to this, scores which they make on
standardized tests are useful in making your
prediction. I think you would also want to look at
the type of activities a student participated in
in high school. whether it be in athletics or
whether it be in student government, whether it be
in the arts such as the band or orchestra, whether
they had extracurricular activities within the
community, whether they belong to certain type of
church organizations, all these kinds of
participation.
Sometimes their ethnic background may give you a
key as to why they did or did not perform as well as
they did. I think it boils down to if you really want
to
select those students who may be best able to
profit by the education, that you're going to have
to do a review, an individual review. I don't think
you can do it just on giving weighted points to
various and certain aspects of the thing. If you
can throw in an interview I think it's even better.
Who should be present at that interview other than
the prospective student? It would probably be
better if an admissions counselor, the person
who's dealing with and used to dealing with the
admissions, and possibly some other person from
maybe an academic area might be. What about from
the student's family? Anybody? Sometimes the
students prefer to talk without parents there.
Are you saying it's better without the parents? I
think it's probably better without the parents,
for the most part. Sometimes an interview with the
parents without the student gives you some
insight, too. Again, we're talking about how much
time you're able to spend in the selection
process. And the more time you can spend up to a
certain point, probably the better job you can do.
I think part of the concern which we've always felt
was that many of our decisions had to be made in a
very quick time because of the number of students
we were dealing with, the fact that all students
couldn't get in for interviews, and these kinds of
things. And it sometimes gave me concern that we
just didn't have as much data as we'd like to have,
and we're doing it on the, that we obviously, we may
be overlooking some factors in a student's life
that might be very beneficial in making the
selection. Which is more important, the score in
the verbal or the mathematical? Statistically,
the verbal score is more important. And the
selection
criteria they used to use for the National Merit
Scholars was weighted that way, I think, too. Is
there anything in this perfect setting for
admissions review? Should there be anything that
the student submits other than transcript, an
essay, or anything else? Well, an essay would
allow them to give
you some additional information about them. It
also gives you a chance to make some kind of a
judgment as to their writing abilities and these
kind of things, which are going to be important
when they get to the university. Right. And in this
perfect admissions process, there would be an
appeals opportunity or not? We did have here, and I
would always like to have an appeals process,
yeah. Because it gives those people, first place,
I think, if they're really interested, they may
make more of an effort in an appeal. Who would be on
the appeals panel? Oh, I'd probably want at least
three different people. One an admissions
person, probably somebody from outside the
admissions office might look at it from a, just a,
from the process, From a time standpoint, it's
sometimes a whole lot easier to have three
different people from the admissions area look at
it, although I think, again, sometimes somebody
from outside the office may have a different set of
glasses to look at than we might have. We may
sometimes get too focused in what we're looking
at. All right. Now, again, relying on your
experience, based on your experience, do you
think A&M... changed his admission requirements
at about the right time and with about the same
amount of restriction that they should have?
Well, I can remember back in the early 70s when Dr.
Williams was here at a meeting one time, he made a
comment that he thought 20,000 would be a nice size
university. And I certainly agreed with him as far
as that's concerned. However, we, because of our
popularity, I guess you'd say, we never even
slowed down to 20,000. I think that we probably
started limiting the enrollment,
it's hard to say, maybe a little bit late. I don't
know what the proper figure should be. From a
financial standpoint, looking at it from a tax
base standpoint, I think that the people in Texas
have a right to expect the best from their
educational institutions. There are
institutions in the state which I am told could
probably handle more students at a lower cost. And
while this may say, well, you're being elitist,
maybe, I think that there are some schools that can
do a very good job of educating students at a
bachelor's level, which would allow more
resources at the master's and doctor's level for
some of the larger universities to fill that gap on
the thing, where if they've got to spend the money
educating more undergraduates, then there's
less at other levels. It's a matter of economics, I
think. Obviously, being an Aggie, I would think
everybody ought to be an Aggie, but the university
From a personal standpoint, I think it has gotten
so large that it's hard to have the personal
interest in the students that you have when the
enrollment is not quite as large.
Let's go back chronologically now. Dr. Williams,
the president, Calhoun, the vice president, in
the 70s, and did they... interfere with
admissions? Did they nitpick? Or did you feel you
had pretty clear understanding of what you all
were to do, and you seldom, if ever, got anything
overruled? I don't recall that they ever quote,
overruled us in that sense. They sometimes ask us
to make admissions where the student had not met
the stated criteria, but because of other factors
they felt like the student might have a chance to be
successful, I think. About how often? Very
seldom. Once a year? I would say probably twice or
three times a year, but again, just wild guess. All
right, then in 1976, Dr. Miller becomes the
president, and Dr. Williams moves up to be
chancellor. Were there any changes in the process
then? Not really. I think by that time, and again,
as I recall, we were probably getting more
crowded. We were probably getting more requests
to make exceptions, I think. I think that we had...
More requests from possibly board members which
were receiving input from people who lived and
knew them and this kind of thing. So I think it
probably as time went on, as we raised the
requirements some, as we had more students
wanting to get in, I think we probably had more
appeals. And we probably made a few more
exceptions at that time than we did other times. Do
you remember any that were bothersome?
To be honest, I think most times when certain board
members got involved, it became bothersome
because they
seldom, as I recall, asked to see if it were in a
student's interest to be admitted. I think they
were more concerned about getting a student
admitted. That's looking back at it. If the board
member wanted it done, whom did the board member
normally contact here?
We had a few board members who would call Ed or I one
direct. For the most part, president and I don't
know that Dr. Vandiver or Dr. Miller set it up for
that they would come through the board secretary
so we had some kind of control over it and then that
queries either to my office or to the president's
office so getting getting the board not calling
directly but at least through the board secretary
and then At some time, then that board secretary
was directed to the president's office or to the
vice president, Dr. Prescott, or to you or to
someone else. Now, when were those
communications normally oral or in writing? Not
in the oral. Were you at the commencement in the
spring of 1980 when Dr. Miller did not shake hands
with a graduate? Yes. Okay. Describe, as you
recall, what happened at the end of that. Because
she's the last degree recipient at the last of
three commencements, Friday afternoon, Friday
night, Saturday morning. Because her name began
with Z, and you graduate alphabetically by
college and by major, and she was in biomedical
science and veterinary medicine. Her name was
Melanie Zintgraff. Describe, as you recall, what
happened. Well, the only, by that time, we had
looked at several hundred students coming across
the state and shaking hands and getting their
diploma and everything. And the only thing I
remember about it, ask her, was the fact that when
she got her diploma, he didn't shake her hand,
which I thought was strange at the time. Were you up
where you could see what happened? Yeah, at each of
the Commencements, as you may recall, I was one of
the, we led the faculty in, and I was always sitting
on the stage because at that time, we were not
handing out hoods at that time, they were carrying
hoods, but anyway, I was always sitting on the
stage because I had been leading the faculty in, so
I was sitting on the stage and glanced over I
usually would watch them as they got their
diplomas. I do recall that he did check her hands.
All right. As I recall, as dean of faculties, I
would carry the mace, put it in the holder, go to the
back of the stage. Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby
was our commencement speaker. And while they're
passing out diplomas, he motioned for me to come up
and sit near him. And we were talking about my going
out to UTEP to be the president. And as I realized we
were about to finish, I started to get out of my
chair, and I heard some hissing, particularly
from corps members. And he asked, what is that all
about? And I said, well, they're unhappy about
something. And I looked around, and then I
recognized who it was. He, too, recognized the
name because he said that she had been a problem for
him. She'd been over to him complaining about her
not being able to be in the band, the official drill
team and the Ross volunteers
and being the last one and hearing the hissing
everybody in the audience was kind of looking at
the stage and getting their notes together and
everything so there's more attention and as I
recall she took the diploma with her right hand by
error moved it to her left and then put out her hand
and Dr. Miller said something to her about not
shaking her hand, and she turned to Lacey and said
something to him, and he said something polite to
her, and as I recall, Don Carter said something
like, ma'am, would you keep the line moving? All
right, did you hear anybody after this on the stage
or in the Letterman's Lounge offer any comment
about what had happened? I don't recall any
comments about the thing. No, that's... It's a
long path. I don't remember. I do remember the fact
that he didn't shake her hand, but that's really
all I remember about him. I think I remember a
couple of board members saying, serves her right,
you know, and I wouldn't have shaken her hand
either. All right. When did you hear that Dr.
Miller's term as president had been ended? And how
did you hear about it? Do you remember? Don't
recall. Okay. Right. Then the new interim
president from engineering,
were there any changes for y'all? No. Okay. Things
went right on. All right. Then in 81, Dr. Vandiver
becomes president. Any changes there? And I say no
changes. What year? 81. No, there wasn't any
changes then. Okay. And then go on forward. Well,
as all I recall, as we go on forward, we get tighter
and tighter as far as numbers are concerned. And
then they begin to talk about limiting enrollment
and those kinds of things. All right. As the
limitation becomes tighter, do the number of
appeals increase? Oh, yeah, I think so. Mm-hmm.
And did y'all make more exceptions for
admissions?
Or was the number still pretty small? I really
don't remember about the numbers that we made.
What we, again, what we went through as we began to
get tighter and tighter, we went to this process of
changing the admission requirements. And then at
that time, the automatics and the review, and of
course the review, we put the number of reviews in
that we thought would give us, we had basically, we
were running somewhere around 63% or something
like that, so we had made it about 10,000. If you
admit about 10,000, you can expect 63,000, 6,000,
somewhere in there to show up on the thing. Did that
change through the years much? As far as I know,
when I left, we were still trying for 6,000, and I
think they're still keeping that 6,000 figure.
But that 63%? Yeah, it
kept eating up. The show-up rate did? Well, the
show rate varied. We put around 62 to 63 or 64
percent. So we kind of worked it around that is the
number that we would admit. As far as you know, was
that very unusual, that percentage? compared to
Austin or other selective public universities?
I don't know. I don't have it prepared. it's
probably unusual to a lot of the universities
because they just it's students either they know
more where they're going to go all right but of
course we had a lot of students that would apply to a
m to texas and texas tech and you know they get
admitted to all three and then they decide where
they want to go based on whatever factors students
decide on but We probably did have more appeals,
because we let them do written appeals, too. We had
hundreds of written appeals, which we would read
through and try to make a decision as to whether we
thought they were married here and making an
exception or not. The review process, it was
fairly easy to take a good number in the review, and
then we got tighter and tighter as we got near this
maximum number that we wanted to admit. Back to
this perfect admissions process we were talking
about a while ago. What part, if any, in the review
of a marginal student, what part, if any, should it
play if this is the child of an A&M graduate? We
factored in a very We were using a number on a review
process. So that would be a plus? It was a plus,
yeah. It was a plus. What if they lived out of state
but were still an A&M graduate child? As I recall,
we were, as far as the admission process was
concerned, we were treating the out-of-state son
or daughter of a former student the same as we would
if they were in-state. That may be wrong, but
that's the way I recall we were doing it. All right.
Then for admission, pure and simple, was it easier
for a Texas resident to be admitted than an
out-of-stater?
Yeah. Did you all have a kind of a percentage in mind
of what percentage of out-of-staters you would
admit? Not really. And again, as I recall...
The figure ran maybe around somewhere around 10%,
but I may be wrong on that. The percentage of
freshmen that entered were, you know, they were
predominantly Texans. And I don't know whether
that figure was 85% or what it was, but it was high.
All right. But did I have to admit, if I'm an
Oklahoman, did I have to have a slightly higher
quality performance in high school and test
scores than if I lived in Dallas. Seemed like we
did. Any unusual difficulties with
international admissions? We handled those
separately and we set kind of a level on those that
we would admit. We didn't get a whole lot of
applications from undergraduates. Most of our
international students were graduate students.
All right, now, through the calendar year, take me
through the calendar year as to what the work
schedule was for y'all, because there must have
been a heavier workload at some parts of the year
than others. Let me go back to one thing on the
international students. We tried to get a
representative base from that so that we didn't
get everybody from Mexico, everybody from
Canada, what have you. So we did try with the
numbers there and we had exceptions to make
possible. We might be more willing to make an
exception from a country who had a smaller student
population from that. Workload, of course the
workload really starts in the fall whenever they
started going and making high school visits. When
we first started, we did the high school visits
from the admissions office. In fact, Gale Wood was
the man to make it, and we used faculty members. I
remember Roger Feldman used to work with us quite a
bit on it. And we had other faculty members that we
would call on to make a night here, a night there,
when Gale just had so many. Because sometimes we'd
have two and three a night, and he couldn't make
them all. I would make a lot of them as well. And then
we got to the point where we had,
and then we started hiring admissions
counselors. We developed an admissions
counselor section, I think, in which we had people
who only did that kind of work, which took the work
off again. This was in the mid-'80s, I guess. He did
it for a number of years all by himself, frankly.
Anyway, the workload starts in the fall. When you
start making a high school college night, we start
putting out applications and they start coming
in. And eventually we put a deadline on
applications when they had to be in to be
considered for the following year. And I think
that it's March 1st, but I may be wrong on that.
Again, going back when I first came, we were taking
applications in August. admitting students, and
students were enrolling in September. Then we
moved it up to about October, excuse me, we moved it
to first of June, something like that, and then we
moved it back to the first of March, I believe it is.
So the workload, it just gradually builds up. Of
course, you continue getting test scores in
during that time where you can make a decision. We
started going from the seventh semester I think to
a sixth semester transcript too. If you waited
until seven you could not possibly get all the work
done so we were using the
transcript, and it just slowly builds up, so to
speak, till you get to the deadline, which was
March the 1st. By that time, you've got all the
applications in. You've already admitted a lot of
the students, but then your review process, in the
later years didn't kick in until March 1st. And
that's when you started having to go through all of
the reviews of the students who didn't meet the
requirements. And they could write in and ask to
have their application reviewed, I believe it was
a procedure we used on them. I don't know what
they're using now. What recruitment processes
did we use then in terms of activities and mailings
and so forth? Went to high school career? A couple.
We went to high school, what's called college
nights. Some of them called them career days, this
kind of thing. Some of the kinds, sometimes the
junior college would combine it with the high
school. Most of the time the junior college or
community college did their separately. We did
that. We had a open house or something there at the
university where, I think it was generally in the
fall and generally on the football weekend as I
recall, where all of the colleges had open house
invited students in, which was a big recruiting
tool on that. I think eventually we moved that to
the spring, I believe.
But a lot of the colleges would send
representatives out to high schools to talk to
students and do that. We had the former students
often would have representatives in the areas and
they would have functions of some kind to acquaint
students with A&M and the admission requirements
and so forth and this kind of thing. When do the best
students get serious about making their
decisions about when and where they're going to go
to college? I think that the better students now
will get their applications in early because they
know that they can go ahead and get admitted and
they may apply to four or five different schools.
It isn't a part of the problem. We may have cut that
down some when we put in an application fee.
They may not apply as many. They've got to put an
application fee into every school they go to. But
for some students, that's not a problem at all. But
I think they apply earlier, generally. I have the
impression that the spring of their junior year,
And by the end of the fall of their senior year,
they've decided probably pretty close. Most
often, if we lost students, I'm using the word lost
in quotation marks now, a student that had
multiple applications and multiple admissions,
usually we were up against UT Austin more often
than anybody else? I would think so. I think they
were our biggest competitor. But seldom to the
private schools? Yeah. Because I think those who,
I think if they want to go to a private school, they
probably don't want to apply to anybody else. I may
be wrong, but I think he was generally, he was
against the University of Texas, possibly Texas
Tech, but generally that would be from somebody
out in West Texas. What did we do, did we do anything
that didn't work with recruitment? things that in
hindsight, no, that one fizzled out, didn't work?
I don't know that we did anything that just didn't
work. I mean, obviously, we never got the number of
National Merit Scholars we wanted. Well, nobody
gets it. Nobody gets it. That's right. Nobody gets
it. And I think we had some good programs to attract
them. Let's jump on that. Why did our number get as
high as it did? We did a good job, and we're in the top
ten still. Yeah. Why? How? It It's my feeling, and
several, I guess. I think that we've done a better
job of letting students know what kind of program
we've got. We've done a better job of recruiting
because, I mean, they've developed a program.
We've brought them in and let them see just like you
would a football athlete or an athlete. And I guess
third, I think we started kicking the money in. The
university did because, as I understand it,
national merit scholarships that are sponsored
by industry and those that are sponsored by the
schools. And the schools can do as many as they want
to, as I understand it. And when we started putting
that money in, then we had more money to give
scholarships. And of course, that's why Rice gets
so many. They've got a foundation, which they can
give a lot. The University of Texas has got a
foundation, which they can give a lot. So I think
that's where the big increase in the national
merit enrollees has come from. We don't have them
anymore that are getting those quote, out of
state, I guess, from industry that may be coming
in, although we're probably attracting more. But
I think we've got it because the university got
into the battle, if you will, with money. Let's
see. Chronologically, we were Vandiver. The
presidents who succeeded him was...